okay today we are going to talk about what I
think is one of the most important economic
changes of the last twenty-thirty years
I'm veryconfident it's going to continue and
dominate the economy for the next 20 years
if you want to understand what's going to
happen in our economy you need to understand
this and it is the death of the middle class
okay so what do I mean when I say the death of
the middle class well the first thing is we need
to define what we mean by the middle class this
is a term that different people mean differently
for the purpose of this video when I talk about
the middle class what I mean is people who are
not rich but have some ownership of wealth so
in this country it basically means anyone who
owns their own property essentially so the UK has
a reputation for being a very unequal country but
in reality if we compare it to all of the countries
across the world and also what the UK was like
for most of its history, it is actually a relatively
equal country and what I mean when I say that is
this country still has today a relatively broad
property owning middle class what that means is
most people own the property that they live in
which means they do have some level of wealth
even if they're not super rich so let's talk a little
bit about the wealth distribution first of all
in this country property residential property
is still quite broadly owned a lot of people
own their own property once we start looking
at commercial property, financial wealth, debt
then we start seeing almost all of that world is
owned by richer people and they've increasingly
the very rich but residential property hassome
level of broad ownership so what that means
is we do have a broad property owning middle
class and that is true in the US and it's true
in Australia, in Japan and most of Western Europe
there is a broad property owning middle class now
what you need to understand is that is not really
normal either internationally or across history
so if you go to look at most of Latin America
or most of Africa or many places in Asia
what you have is very unequal countries where
most people do not own much wealth at all you
have a very large poor group and a small
very rich group and you do not have this
broad property owning middle class like we have
here that's also true if you look throughout
history right so before the second world wars
in the early 20th century in the 19th century
in the industrial revolution what you had in
this country was different to what you have now
so at this point in time most people own or
their family owns the property they live in
it's decreasing over time but still most do
whereas if you were to look in the *1800s*
the vast majority of people here in London the vast
majority were renting very few people own their
own home and there was not broad wealth ownership
so this broad property owned middle class
you need to understand that even though it has
been normal for the last 50-60 years it is not normal
either across the world or throughout the
history of capitalism and if anything the
last 70 years have been very special historically
in the sense that we have had this broad property
owning middle class here, in the US, in Australia
and in Europe & I think one big thing that has
dominated the economy over the last 20 years and
will definitely dominate it going forward is that
that middle class is slowly dying and what I mean
by that is the middle class is losing their assets
and that is happening in two ways, one the direct
loss of the assets themselves so in this country
asset ownership by non-rich people is almost
always in the form of property if you look at
younger people their rate of property ownership is
collapsing so the number one way which the middle
class dies loses their assets is direct loss of
property and the second way is increased debt
which means ordinary people have to go deeper into
debt to fund their lifestyles but increasingly if
you want to own a property the only way to do
that is to take out enormous amounts of debt
now this in my opinion is has really dominated
the economy especially since 2008 and my big
sort of penny drop moment when I realised what was
happening with the economy was when I was a trader
and I was trying to deal with the question of 'why
is it that people can't spend much money?' this has
been the dominant economic narrative since 2008
and when I looked into the situation of ordinary
families and also of governments what I saw was
ordinary families were losing their wealth over time
you can see this in the form of decreasedproperty
ownership rates and also governments were
losing their wealth you could see this in the form
of governments falling deeper and deeper into debt
so that has created a situation where we have
economic weakness because families and governments
can't spend because they're losing their wealth
over time now when we consider this loss of wealth
of the middle class in many ways what we are
seeing is the mirror image of something which I
have spoken about a lot already on this channel
which is the rapid growth and snowballing of
wealth of the very rich now when you consider
the wealth distribution you need to understand
we have this property owning middle class all the
know people that in many cases own their own homes
but when it comes to the broader commercial
infrastructure of our economies the factories,
the skyscrapers, the officebuildings,
food production, energy production
all of this commercial infrastructure is largely
owned by the rich and that means that every single
month every single year ordinary people have to
spend a lot of money which goes to the rich in
order to get things like food, energy, transport,
the basic essentials of life or even housing
if you don't own your own home and this creates
enormous flows of wealth to the rich every year
the flows of wealth are so enormous that
rich people can't spend them, Rishi Sunak as
I've said many times on the channel gets a
passive income of 20-30 million pounds a year
they can't spend that money so
they use that money to buy assets
and when you have a growing economy this isn't
necessarily a bad thing you're creating allof
this new economic wealth, these new assets,
new factories, new office blocks and the rich
will own those new assets when it becomes a
really big problem is when that growth slows down
so when economies stop growing you are still
having to pay all of that money to the rich
every year the rich are still receiving all that
money every year what do they do with that money
if they can't buy new assets because there are
not good investment opportunities they will still
receive that money and what they start to do is
they use that money to buy your assets and I think
what's really interesting is the things that
the rich people do with those money with that
money often appears good from the perspective
of the middle class so when the rich get that
money and they're not investing they either
buy your assets or they lend you that money
from the perspective of a middle class person what
you see is the rich want to buy my house, my house
price is going up, the rich want to lend me money
I have increased availability of mortgages and
both of those things seem good right you are an
ordinary family your house price is going up great
you can get more access to mortgages great
these are good things but if we think about
what it is actually doing in terms of flows
of wealth that is rich people buying houses
from more middle class families and often this
happens generationally rich people take the
money, they give it to their kids, their kids have
a large amount of money, they go out and they buy
the houses that maybe your kids would have bought
and instead of your house going to your kids or
another kid from an ordinary middle class family
ends up going to rich people when they lend money
what that means is it might seem good for you
if you can get a mortgage but if the rich are
lending more then that means everybody can get a
big mortgage and that means you are competing with
people who can get big mortgages and what that
means is it becomes impossible for ordinary middle
class people to buy property without taking a
massive mortgage essentially from the rich so you
create a situation where on the one hand middle
class families are selling their properties to the
rich and on the other hand if they are actually
able to keep property the only way to do it is by
taking a massive debt from the rich so you have
two sides of the same coin here right massive
wealth accumulation from the rich is mirrored by
loss of assets for the middle class and increase
of debt for the middle class and exactly
the same thing is happening for governments
governments are losing their assets governments
are going into debt and you can see how this is
it's impossible for the rich to accumulate
assets in a low growth economy without these
things happening because the assets have to come
from somewhere and what you see is loss of assets
for middle class, loss of assets for government,
growth of debt for the middle class, growth of
debt for the government it's important to realise
that when the rich lend poor people money to buy
assets essentially what's happening is the rich
are buying the assets through the poor now if I
lend you half a million pounds and use that half
million pounds to buy a house you still have to
pay me interest every year and it's very similar
to paying rent so the lending really is just
the flip side of the rich buying the asset it's
another way for the rich to buy the assets so in
both cases the rich are gaining assets the middle
class are losing those assets and over time we
lose that property owning middle class and we also
lose that property owning and stable government
once this starts going it is essentially
inevitable it will continue right because
once the middle class starts
to lose their assets then
there are more people who don't own property and
have to rent once they start to fall heavily into
debt then they have to pay large amounts of
interest every year this means bigger flows of
money from the middle class to the rich which
the rich can then use to buy the rest of the
assets which means it starts a spiral which
builds up momentum over time and this is why
it is pretty much inevitable that the middle
class will significantly lose their assets over
the next 20 30 40 years and of all my economic
predictions I think this is the one that I'm most
confident about that we will lose that property
owning middle class over the next 30-40 years
um so what does that mean what does that
mean well fortunately if we want to know what
economies without property owning middle classes
look like it's really easy to see that because
we the world is full of them you can go to Brazil
you can go to South Africa you can go to Russia
you can go to India and you can see what economies
look like when you do not have a property owning
middle class so for the last 70 years we have had
property owning middle class in Europe in the US
and it has led to a situation where we have had
broadly high standard of living not for everyone
there has always been poverty but it has been
unusual if we compare to most of history in the
percentage of people who live decent quality lives
if you look at countries without those property
middle classes what do they look like? they look
likesmall super wealthy elites and very very large
essentially very poor people that very often
they're forced to live in very squalid housing
on the outskirts of cities they work for very
low wages and that is because when you lose your
property owning middle class what you also
lose is your customer base the basis of the
wealth of Western economies in the last 70 years
is you have a big middle class you have a lot of
customers and what that means is even if you are
not middle class even if you are poor you have
a lot of customers so so you can get a decent
wage because there's a lot of people competing
for your labour basically but once you lose that
middle class then you move to a situation where
workers are also significantly disadvantaged and
I think it's really interesting to go and sort
of look at cities like Johannesburg or Sao Paulo
Mumbai and what you see is because there's so few
customers the poor are then forced to cluster
into the big cities because it's the only way
to get work because that's where the rich people
are essentially and that's the only place you can
get your money from and I think it's interesting
that we're kind of seeing slowly slowly at first
the same thing happening here in London which
is London is significantly increasing in size
is seeing an influx of poor people from
within the country from without the country
they're trying to get accommodation in the big
city because it's the only place where they can
get a decent job and it's kind of leading to
a slumification of the outskirts of the city
you know I grew up in ilford which is one of
the cheapest places to live in London you've
seen a massive increase in density you've seen a
massive decrease in the average quality of housing
and essentially it's becoming slum and this is
what what happens when you lose your middle class
if you don't have a middle class society you
have a rich and poor society and if you don't
have a middle class society you don't need middle
class housing what you need is rich housing and
poor housing and increasingly that is what we will
see so it will lead to a situation of very small
wealthy elite and basically really really broad
poverty and um I don't want that to happen that's
why I made this channel um and it will happen, it
will happen for the simple reason that if you take
two groups of people a large middle class and and
a small rich elite and you constantly pump wealth
from the middle class to the super rich elite
and you don't pump anything back in the other
direction it is inevitable that over time this
group will lose their wealth you know if I take
if I take two buckets of water and I constantly
pour water from one to the other eventually it
will run out of water and this will this will
inevitably happen and you can easily see that
when you look at the flows of wealth between
the middle class and the rich, the middle class
will eventually disappear and we can see what
that looks like you know it's go and look at
what countries are like without middle class
go and look read up on the history of the UK
or whatever country you're in what it looked like
in the early 20th century and 19th century before
we had a broad property owning middle class
and you'll see is is a is a place of broad poverty
and very low living conditions and we can see it
happening in front of our eyes we can see poverty
growing we can see living standards falling and
that is inevitably what will happen if you have
growing inequality slowly dying middle class
in a situation of no economic growth and the
only way to fix that is the pump wealth back in
the other direction and um we've called to it
many times on this channel we need high tax
on rich people it's the only way to support the
middle class if your wealth is being pumped out of
your communities out of your families towards the
very rich nothing is pumped back eventually we'll have
nothing left so please support us in campaigning
for higher tax on the rich, because if we don't
do it, it will mean poverty for the rest of us and
um yeah it's important so uh yeah tax the rich
more& support the channel thanks for your time
money currently is flowing from the
government to the rich leaving the
government with big piles of debt and the
rich with big piles of money, there's 1 other
thing they can do with that mass amount
of income they can buy your mum's house